Cluster Transport Encryption Documentation (#3031)
mattermost/docs: source/install/transport-encryption/config-cluster.rst

=============================================
Configuring Cluster Transport Encryption (E20)
=============================================

Mattermost is able to encrypt the messages sent within the cluster of a deployment
using SSH tunneling. The guide walks through the deployment of this solution on
Ubuntu 18.04, but it can be adapted for any Linux operating system.

> While this document only describes the configuration of a 3 node cluster, it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this document only describes the configuration of a three-node cluster, it is
```

by no means limited to that amount.

> **Prerequisites:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer 2: The header formatting should be corrected, and the list formatting is not rendering correctly.

> - SSH port whitelisted between each node of the deployment

Reviewer: Do we need to provide a port number? Is this done on Mattermost?

Author: No, this is usually a standard port that may depend on the persons configuration as well. We can safely assume they know this.

> - ufw / iptables is active on each node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Active ufw/iptables on each node
```

> - Access to the root / sudo user of each node for configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to the root/sudo user of each node for configuration
```

- A configured Mattermost cluster
- Mattermost running with a dedicated service user
- Mattermost service is stopped on each cluster node

> **Note:** A support on the application level is currently in development and will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Support on the application level is currently in development and will
```
Not sure if that change works - I may have misunderstood the sentence. From what I can see, it refers to support offered by us on the application level?

deprecate this document.

Example Environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In this scenario there are 3 application nodes in our environment with the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario there are three application nodes in our environment with the following
```

> hostname / IP mapping:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hostname/IP mapping:
```

- **transport-encryption-mattermost1:** 10.10.250.146
- **transport-encryption-mattermost2:** 10.10.250.231
- **transport-encryption-mattermost3:** 10.10.250.165

Preparations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Connect to each Mattermost server with a sudo or root user
- Make a note of the IP from each cluster member used for the internal communication
- Ensure ``AllowTcpForwarding`` is enabled in ``/etc/ssh/sshd_config`` of each cluster node

SSH Authentication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> On each node generate a SSH key-pair for the service account, in our scenario

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On each node, generate a SSH key-pair for the service account. In our scenario this is
```

called ``mattermost``:

.. code-block:: none

  $ sudo -u mattermost ssh-keygen -t rsa
    Generating public/private rsa key pair.
    Enter file in which to save the key (/home/mattermost/.ssh/id_rsa):
    Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase):
    Enter same passphrase again:
    Your identification has been saved in /home/mattermost/.ssh/id_rsa.
    Your public key has been saved in /home/mattermost/.ssh/id_rsa.pub.
    The key fingerprint is:
    SHA256:redacted mattermost@transport-encryption-mattermost1

The location of the SSH key itself is irrelevant if company policies require
the usage of another storage location.

> Next, ensure that the SSH public key of each node is added to ``authorized_keys``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, ensure that the SSH public key of each node is added to the ``authorized_keys``
```

file of the other nodes of the cluster. To do so, copy the contents of ``/home/mattermost/.ssh/id_rsa.pub``

> of node 2 and 3, and add it to ``/home/mattermost/.ssh/authorized_keys`` of node 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of nodes 2 and 3, and add it to ``/home/mattermost/.ssh/authorized_keys`` of node 1.
```

Repeat this step for each node of the cluster. As a result, each node should be
able to establish an SSH connection to the other nodes of the cluster.

**Note:** This service account can be separate from the service account already used

> for the Mattermost systemd service itself. It is only important that it is allowed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the Mattermost ``systemd`` service itself. It is only important that it is allowed
```

> for the Mattermost ``systemd`` service itself. It is only important that it is allowed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for the Mattermost ``systemd`` service itself. It is important that it is allowed
```

> to create a SSH tunnel with port forwarding and does not require any additional

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to create a SSH tunnel with port forwarding, but it does not require any additional
```

permissions.

ufw Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a next step, allow SSH access from each of the other member nodes, e.g.:

- mattermost1 allows from mattermost2 and mattermost3
- mattermost2 allows from mattermost1 and mattermost3
- mattermost3 allows from mattermost1 and mattermost2

To do so, we add an exception in the firewall. The commands for ``mattermost1`` look as
follows:

.. code-block:: none

  $ sudo ufw allow from 10.10.250.231/32 to any port ssh
  Rule added
  $ sudo ufw allow from 10.10.250.165/32 to any port ssh
  Rule added
  $ sudo ufw status
  Status: active

  To                         Action      From
  --                         ------      ----
  22/tcp                     ALLOW       10.10.250.10
  8065/tcp                   ALLOW       Anywhere
  22/tcp                     ALLOW       10.10.250.231
  22/tcp                     ALLOW       10.10.250.165

> Repeat the same steps on the other nodes, but replacing the IPs with the ones from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repeat the same steps on the other nodes, replacing the IPs with the ones from the
```

other member nodes. Do so for each member node, excluding the node itself.

> As a next step, open ``/etc/ufw/after.rules`` and add the following block to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, open ``/etc/ufw/after.rules`` and add the following block to the
```

bottom of the file:

.. code-block:: none

  *nat
  :POSTROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]
  :PREROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]

  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d 10.10.250.231 --dport 8075 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:18075
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d 10.10.250.231 --dport 8074 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:18074
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d 10.10.250.165 --dport 8075 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:28075
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d 10.10.250.165 --dport 8074 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:28074

  COMMIT

> Two lines always belong to a single node, so in a deployment with 4 nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two lines always belong to a single node, so in a deployment with four nodes:
```

.. code-block:: none

  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d ip_node_2 --dport 8075 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:18075
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d ip_node_2 --dport 8074 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:18074
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d ip_node_3 --dport 8075 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:28075
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d ip_node_3 --dport 8074 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:28074
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d ip_node_4 --dport 8075 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:38075
  -A OUTPUT -p tcp -d ip_node_4 --dport 8074 -j DNAT --to-destination 127.0.0.1:38074

Please be aware that the ports on the right side must be unique, so if you have a cluster of

> 6 nodes, use 8075 and 8074 with 1 to 5 in front of it. If the cluster is of bigger size, additional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
six nodes, use 8075 and 8074 with 1 to 5 in front of it. If the cluster is of bigger size, additional
```

ports must be used.

> Ensure that your operating system has IP forwarding enabled using the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure that your operating system has IP forwarding enabled using the following command:

```

.. code-block:: none

  $ sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_forward=1

After that, reload the ufw rules and confirm that the iptable rules were successfully
created:

> .. code-block:: none

Reviewer 2: Code block is not rendering.

  $ iptables -t nat -L
  Chain PREROUTING (policy ACCEPT)
  target     prot opt source               destination

  Chain INPUT (policy ACCEPT)
  target     prot opt source               destination

  Chain OUTPUT (policy ACCEPT)
  target     prot opt source               destination
  DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             10.10.250.231        tcp dpt:8075 to:127.0.0.1:18075
  DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             10.10.250.231        tcp dpt:8074 to:127.0.0.1:18074
  DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             10.10.250.165        tcp dpt:8075 to:127.0.0.1:28075
  DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             10.10.250.165        tcp dpt:8074 to:127.0.0.1:28074

Repeat those steps for every node on the cluster. At the end of this section
the following should be configured:

- SSH access enabled in firewall from each cluster node to another
- Per node 2 iptables rules for port 8074 and 8075

> - IP Forwarding enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- IP forwarding enabled
```

SSH Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a next step, we will ensure that the SSH tunnels are created as part of the Mattermost service
start. To do so, create a file called ``pre_start.sh`` in ``/opt/mattermost/bin`` on ``mattermost1``:

.. code-block:: none

  #!/bin/bash
  ssh -N -f -o ServerAliveInterval=60 -o ExitOnForwardFailure=yes -L 18075:10.10.250.231:8075 10.10.250.231 || true
  ssh -N -f -o ServerAliveInterval=60 -o ExitOnForwardFailure=yes -L 18074:10.10.250.231:8074 10.10.250.231 || true
  ssh -N -f -o ServerAliveInterval=60 -o ExitOnForwardFailure=yes -L 28075:10.10.250.165:8075 10.10.250.165 || true
  ssh -N -f -o ServerAliveInterval=60 -o ExitOnForwardFailure=yes -L 28074:10.10.250.165:8074 10.10.250.165 || true

**Note:** We are ignoring the error from the SSH connection itself in case a tunnel

> is already active. Otherwise the Mattermost server would refuse to start.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is already active. Otherwise the Mattermost server would fail to start.
```

**Note:** Please make sure to back up this script in case of a version upgrade.

Afterwards, we set the executable bit on the shell script:

.. code-block:: none

  $ chmod +x /opt/mattermost/bin/pre_start.sh

> Open the systemd unit file of Mattermost and search for ``Type=Notify``, after it enter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open the systemd unit file of Mattermost and search for ``Type=Notify``. After this, enter
```

a ``ExecStartPre`` script that will be executed before Mattermost itself is started:

.. code-block:: none

  [Service]
  Type=notify
  ExecStartPre=/opt/mattermost/bin/pre_start.sh

Reload the systemd daemon afterwards:

.. code-block:: none

  $ systemctl daemon-reload

Repeat the same steps on each of the member nodes and adapt the node IPs and amount
of entries for your environment.

Cluster Start
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Once each node is configured, restart the service on each cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once each node is configured, restart the service on each cluster
```

> After finishing the configuration on each node, start the service on each cluster again

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once each node is configured, restart the service on each cluster.
```

> and confirm it's running using the command below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and confirm that it's running using the command below:
```

> and confirm it's running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and confirm it's running using the command below.
```

.. code-block:: none

  root@transport-encryption-mattermost1:/opt/mattermost/bin# systemctl start mattermost
  root@transport-encryption-mattermost1:/opt/mattermost/bin# systemctl status mattermost.service
  ● mattermost.service - Mattermost
     Loaded: loaded (/lib/systemd/system/mattermost.service; static; vendor preset: enabled)
     Active: active (running) since Fri 2019-10-04 19:44:20 UTC; 5min ago
    Process: 16734 ExecStartPre=/opt/mattermost/bin/pre_start.sh (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)

> Afterwards open the Mattermost System Console and confirm that each node is reporting successfully

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, open the Mattermost System Console and confirm that each node is reporting successfully
```
